### Assignments for CIS 355

There are three major assignments in CIS 355.  Overviews follow.

- Transactional Database Development (20 pts)
    - Your team has selected a chapter from the Kimball textbook (from ch. 7-16) as a "case study" for the course project.  In the first series of assignments, you will design and build a transactional (operational) database for the case study.  This should get you up to speed with SQL, ER Diagramming, and the basics of logical/physical database implementation.
    - **Subtasks:**
        - **Repository Setup (5pts) (due Sept. 3):** Set up your team's repository on GitHub and initialize it with a README file that identifies team members and the case study.
        - **ER Diagram & Requirements (5pts) (due Sept. 17):** Document the requirements for your database in terms of "business rules" and draw an ER diagram for a database that reflects those requirements.  The files should be committed to your GitHub repo.
        - **Transactional Database Implementation (5pts) (due Sept. 22):** Code the SQL that will implement your database in PostgreSQL.  This should be a series of CREATE TABLE statements with correct data types, primary and foreign keys.  Commit this code to your GitHub repo.
        - **Database Tests (5pts) (due Sept. 24):**  Write queries in SQL that *test* your database to make sure it does everything it's supposed to.  Update the requirements, ER diagram, and database creation code in GitHub if they need to change to make it work.  In the test script, use comments to tell me what each test is supposed to prove, and what output is expected.
            
- Dimensional Database Development (20 pts)
    - Your team will develop a dimensional database (a data warehouse) in stages.  More details TBD.
    - **Subtasks:**
        - **Requirements part 1 (5pts) (due Oct 13):**  Develop a dimensional model (star schema) for your case study.  This can be a simple one with a transactional fact type that relates to the transactional database you designed earlier.  You should include SQL code to create the tables and views in PostgreSQL but no data is needed.  In another file (or the same file, via comments), briefly explain the business purpose of this model, its grain, and any explanations needed to understand it.  You should also prepare a diagram of the star schema.
        - **Requirements part 2 (5pts) (due Oct 27):**  Develop an additional dimensional model/schema based on your case study.  This one should be a periodic snapshot or accumulating snapshot fact type, and it may go beyond the data available from the transactional source system you designed earlier.  Also include a file which discusses the business purpose, identifies the grain, and shows a diagram of the star schema.  *In addition*, provide your version of the enterprise "bus matrix" for this business case, highlighting where your two models fall, and make note of the conformed dimensions you were able to re-use from the first to the second model.
        - **Transforms part 1 (5pts) (due Nov 10):**  Populate your source system (transactional database) with some fake data (or real data if you can find some!).  If you used a script or spreadsheet to generate the fake data, please commit it to GitHub, but don't upload the data itself as it will probably be too big.  We're looking for hundreds of thousands of rows here, if your computer can handle it.  Now create and document a process for extracting, transforming, and loading data from the source system into your first dimensional model's fact and dimension tables.  Include any SQL or other code that you used.  If you used a GUI program, take some screenshots and write about the process so we can see how you did it.  I may ask you to show me the data on your computer in class.
        - **Transforms part 2 (5pts) (due Nov 24):**  Do the same for your second dimensional model.  This may involve updating the design of the source system or bringing in data from an outside source.  In either case, commit your code to GitHub if possible, or documentation and screenshots otherwise.  I may ask to see the data in the dimensional model on your computer in class.    

- Final Presentations (20 pts)
    - In your final presentation you will demonstrate a business intelligence application (e.g. a dashboard) that uses your two dimensional models.  In this presentation and in your final report, you will also briefly recap what you learned from your course project; in particular, make note of issues/challenges that pertain especially to your case study more than others.
    - **Subtasks:**
        - **In-class "Tech Talk" (10pts) (December 3):** In about a 10-12 minute demonstration, show us the highlights of your project.  What do we need to know about the case study to understand the requirements?  What information do your dimensional models provide, and how would those help the organization make better decisions?  What were the special technical challenges posed by this case?
        - **Project Report (10pts) (due December 8):** In a report of at least 20 double-spaced pages, document the stages of your project: transactional database modeling, dimensional model designs, data creation and ETL, and business intelligence application development.  Give the paper a good introduction and conclusion that summarize what you did and what you learned, as well as a cover page and TOC.  You may include screenshots, code samples, and other pertinent information.